And we are retracing the steps of the Children of Israel, their epic journey from Egypt to the Promised Land.
And in that process, we're taking a look at how that parallels our walk in the Christian life and what we can learn from that.
And one of the things I've been encouraging you to do, and I'll just remind you again, is as we go through this series in keeping with this whole idea of going on the trip, that you keep a travel log.
And by that I mean do some writing.
be reading on your own at home, the story of Israel's trek through the wilderness.
And as you read that, be praying and ask the Lord, what can I learn that applies to my life, my own journey with you?
And write those things down as we go, and I would love to hear some of the things that you're observing.
I got an email this week.
It was not directly on show of Israel, but it was just a really beautiful reflection on God being at work in our lives.
And I know others of you,
God's been giving you some good stuff in these last few weeks.
I would love to see what you have been learning and thinking about.
We started this study by considering the implications of the first Passover.
What got Passover started, right?
It was that night of terrible judgment on the Egyptians who had steadfastly refused to release the enslaved people of Israel.
But it was also this night of divine protection.
God delivered his people and they were protected from the destroyer and they were protected because they put their faith in God's promise to them.
A lamb was sacrificed.
You recall it was the lamb's blood that marked the doorway to their homes and those within those houses were safe that night.
And we talked about the fact that the Christian life begins with this act of faith in the supreme lamb of God in Jesus.
And then we consider that next major event last week, we looked at Israel's escape from Egypt and specifically that miraculous crossing of the Red Sea.
And that deliverance from Egypt's power had involved two things, right?
The first was the saving blood of the Lamb.
And the second was the crossing over the Red Sea, something that they were not able to accomplish without God's intervention.
It required a miracle of God for them to actually escape the land of slavery.
And yet Israel still had to choose to obey and move from where they were to take the way of escape that God had given them.
We talked about the fact that in the same way the Christian has brought into a new life by the power of the substitutionary death of Jesus on the cross.
And inherent in that is also this call to cross over, to leave behind the things that have enslaved us and then
in faith to step into a life of obedience to Jesus.
And yet our steps of faith are merely a response to God's grace in making a way.
We talked last week about the morality river and that as hard as you might want to cry and stroke across on your own, swim on your own and make your way to the other side, none of us can do it perfectly.
And just like the children of Israel, there comes a point where we have to say, Lord, unless you make a way
there is no way for me to cross over on my own and that gift of salvation is something that God makes available freely to us because of his grace.
Now today we're going to take a look at a third foundational part of Israel's journey through the wilderness and it's something that we skipped over as we were talking about moving from Passover to the Red Sea Crossing and yet it was essential both in their escape from Egypt as well as their entire journey in the Promised Land.
Today we're gonna take a look at the fiery cloud that led the way.
Let me take you to Exodus chapter 13.
And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of cloud to lead them along the way.
And by night in a pillar of fire to give them light that they might travel by day and by night.
The pillar of cloud by day and the pillar of fire by night did not depart from before the people.
Now, if you read this story, you'll find that the cloud appears even before the people have crossed the Red Sea.
In chapter 14, it's recorded that the fiery cloud stood guard between Pharaoh's army and the people of Israel the night before they made that crossing of the Red Sea.
The fullest description that we get of it, because it raises lots of questions.
What was this?
We get a fuller description later in their journey.
At this point in the journey where we're going to read this description, they actually have built the tabernacle.
This beautiful tent, a portable temple, if you will, that traveled with them.
And that tent itself was full of symbolism.
Someday I think I'll probably do a sermon series just on the tabernacle because it's fascinating to examine all the things that were in it.
That tabernacle was always set up in the middle of the camp.
all of the tribes surrounded with the tabernacle in the center.
And it symbolically said, God stands at the center of who we are as a people.
Right alongside that highly symbolic tent and actually resting over it was what I'm calling the fiery cloud.
This comes out of Numbers chapter 9.
On the day that the tabernacle was set up, the cloud covered the tabernacle, the tent of the testimony.
And in evening, it was over the tabernacle like the appearance of fire until morning.
So it was always.
The cloud covered it by day and the appearance of fire by night.
Whenever the cloud lifted from over the tent, after that, the people of Israel set out.
And in the place where the clouds settled down, there the people of Israel camped.
At the command of the Lord, the people of Israel set out, and at the command of the Lord, they camped.
As long as the cloud rested over the tabernacle, they remained in camp.
Even when the cloud continued over the tabernacle many days, the people of Israel kept the charge of the Lord and did not set out.
Sometimes the cloud was a few days over the tabernacle, and according to the command of the Lord, they remained in camp.
Then, according to the command of the Lord, they set out.
And sometimes the cloud remained from evening until morning.
And when the cloud lifted in the morning, they set out.
or if it continued for a day and a night, then the cloud lifted, they set out.
Whether it was two days or a month or a longer time that the cloud continued over the tabernacle abiding there, the people of Israel remained in camp and did not set out, but when it lifted, they set out.
At the command of the Lord they camped, and at the command of the Lord they set out, they kept the charge of the Lord at the command of the Lord by Moses.
So what was that all about?
I don't know about you, but when I read about this, I have just so many questions.
What exactly did this pillar of cloud and fire look like?
I mean, get a little hint from the text and numbers.
We're told that it covered the tabernacle by day, and that the cloud says it had the appearance of fire by night.
And that's why we're referring to it as a fiery cloud.
My sense is that it wasn't necessarily a blazing fire tornado, if you will, but that at night, this cloud, what had been a cloud by day, had its own glow.
We talk about sometimes at night, you'll see the clouds lit up at night, we'll say the clouds were on fire.
And that's kind of my sense, that at night, this cloud, you realize it had its own internal light emanating from it.
I don't think that takes away from the fire metaphor at all because God was still revealing His presence in a way that's best described as fire.
Fire is a metaphor in Scripture that the Scripture returns too often to describe God's presence and His holiness.
Another question I have is how big was this thing?
I mean, how big was the cloud?
How big was this fiery cloud before them?
It appears it was large enough
to have provided a protective barrier between the encampment of Israel and the army of Egypt.
So I would take it, that was pretty big, but also appears, been large enough both to serve as a leading beacon to several thousand people and even provide illumination if they traveled at night.
So again, that sounds pretty big.
But then you also find, as you read the story, descriptions of the cloud standing at the doorway to the tent of meeting.
which sounds like something a lot smaller, a lot more compact.
And so my sense is that the size of the cloud varied to fit the situation.
Leading the nation, big cloud.
Marking the tenant meeting, small cloud.
Same cloud, just different size.
More important than some of the logistical questions that we might have about the cloud, I think scripture invites us to ponder
Why the Lord chose to manifest His presence in this way?
Why this pillar of cloud by day and this fiery pillar at night?
One of the things that God never permitted Israel to do was to create an image to represent Him.
A consistent, critique you'll find in scripture of pagan nations was that they served gods that they had made with their own hands.
You'll find this in the prophets.
Others talk about this.
The foolishness to bow down and worship something that you have carved with your own hands.
And the troll of Israel were never allowed to create an image of God.
Any God that you can reduce to an art piece has to be a God of limited scope.
A God that can be somehow controlled or manipulated.
The idol worshiping nations usually had multiple gods because no single god could do everything.
They all were limited in scope.
There were gods of war and goddesses of fertility, gods of thunder, gods of wine, and gods of just about any other especially that you could imagine.
And each of them was carved or cast or painted with a specific look that tried to tell you what this particular god was good at.
Think about the gods of the Greek and Romans.
You've got Zeus.
Remember Zeus?
He's got the thunderbolts in his hand, the god of thunder, or Hermes, the messenger of the gods.
He's the one that had wings on his feet to help him go faster.
Or Medusa, who had the lovely hairdo of writhing snakes.
Or Artemis.
I remember when Paul went to Ephesus, that's where they made a lot of the images of Artemis, and they realized
that as Paul was preaching about Jesus and people were turning to Jesus, they were turning away from the worship of Artemis.
And that's what led to the riot.
They were afraid, the trades were afraid that their business was gonna be ruined if people stopped buying images and idols of Artemis.
Well, Artemis was a goddess of fertility.
And because of that, the image of Artemis, you can look these statues up online easily enough, Artemis is covered in breasts.
because she's the goddess of fertility.
The tabernacle that eventually sat at the middle of the Israelite encampment was full of its own kind of art.
There were lots of artistic pieces there, and they all symbolically spoke to different aspects of who God was and what he was doing among his people, but there was no image of God himself.
The only symbol that spoke directly to God's presence
was the fiery cloud that descended and rested over the tabernacle.
When you think about clouds, clouds are ethereal, aren't they?
Have you ever tried to grab hold of a cloud?
I remember the first time I got to fly in an airplane, I thought, wow, what's it going to be like to fly through a cloud?
Well, you just kind of went through the cloud.
You couldn't really wrap your hands around it.
And so in one sense,
A cloud is almost nothing.
And yet, it's not.
In fact, I had the chance years ago to do part of ground school, the friend of mine.
Unfortunately, he got a job change, and I never got to finish it.
But this is the private pilot manual.
And right there I've marked where there is a whole section in this manual about clouds.
Now here we're talking about planes that are worth hundreds of thousands of dollars and sophisticated instruments and all of the things that go into flight and yet we had to spend time learning about clouds because clouds can have a big effect on a flight because there's a lot of power that can be held in the cloud.
You watch any storm as it is building and you realize clouds can represent something incredibly powerful.
Clouds can be a source of violent storms.
Clouds are uncontrollable.
Since God is saying, that is me.
In some ways, you can't wrap your hands around me, but I am everywhere.
And I am powerful.
Fire, why fire?
Cloud that glowed in blazing fiery color at night, it reminded Israel that God was always present.
And that fire, it speaks to purity and power and illumination and a living force.
You think about the relationship of that fiery cloud and the tabernacle.
When it came time to move, the priest would pack up the tabernacle with all of its symbolism.
But you can't pack up a cloud.
It wouldn't fit in any bags for going on the trip.
All you could do was you could follow it.
And even on the darkest night,
When God wanted his people to move, it was his illumination that showed the way.
The fiery cloud was always present showing them the way.
So what do we make of this fiery cloud?
Well, eventually Israel came to their promised land and in place of a mobile tabernacle, they were able to erect a fixed temple.
And again, the temple was filled with symbols, but it did not contain any depiction of God himself.
Here's the account of Solomon's dedication of the newly completed temple.
This comes from 2 Chronicles 7.
As soon as Solomon finished his prayer, fire came down from heaven and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices and the glory of the Lord filled the temple.
And the priest could not enter the house of the Lord
because the glory of the Lord filled the Lord's house.
So there was a temple, it was a beautiful temple, Solomon had built it, the finest materials, and yet what mattered more was the manifest presence of the Lord, a presence that was manifested in fire and something that was described as the glory of the Lord.
Something visible but ethereal that
filled the temple.
Something that was not man-made and yet it was substance to them enough that it says the priest could not enter.
It was a glorious holy cloud.
That's interesting in the temple ever after.
There was a flame that was kept constantly burning there.
It was a symbol, a reminder that God's spirit was always present with them.
Now if you move on from the book of Exodus and this account in Chronicles and you get to the book of Acts, we get into the New Testament, if in the death of the Lamb of Passover we find a picture of Jesus dying in our place, rescuing this from the curse of death, and if in the resurrection we find the promise that a way has been opened for us to cross over from death to life,
just as Israel by God's miraculous power crossed over from slavery into a journey of freedom, then on Pentecost, I think we once again find the fiery cloud descending to lead God's people on a journey.
Here's what we find in Acts chapter two.
When the day of Pentecost arrived, they, that is the disciples, were all together in one place.
And suddenly, there came from heaven a sound like a mighty rushing wind
and it filled the entire house where they were sitting and divided tongues as of fire appeared to them and rested on each one of them.
Do you see what's happening in the symbolism?
The assurance to the nation of Israel that God was with them was the appearance of a pillar of fire to illuminate the night in a cloud to lead them.
The evidence of God's presence first in the wilderness tabernacle and later in the temple of Jerusalem was the fire falling from God to consume the sacrifices and this glory cloud of his presence filling the tabernacle.
The ongoing symbolic reminder in the temple of God's presence was an eternal flame that burned brightly.
But now for the people who have put their faith in the blood of God's perfect lamb,
and who have willingly chosen to follow him into a new life journey.
The fire comes to rest not on a tabernacle or on a temple, but it rests on individuals.
Do you see the shift there?
You remember how that fiery cloud and wilderness was sometimes huge and sometimes small.
It manifested itself proportionate the occasion.
And on the day of Pentecost,
the fire manifested itself in very personal proportions.
It came to rest on each one of the believers gathered there.
In these opening experiences of Israel's journey out of Egypt, I think we see evidence really of the Triune God.
We see God the Father displaying his power as Moses obediently raises his staff as the plagues fall, as the Red Sea is parted,
God the Son is foreshadowed in the saving death of the Passover Lamb.
And God the Holy Spirit is revealed in the fiery cloud as He leads the people on their journey through the wilderness.
So what does the story of Israel and the fiery cloud have to teach us on our own journey?
Fascinating what that meant for the children of Israel, what does it mean for us?
Well first I would say if you are a follower of Jesus, one of the messages is
You are not alone.
Israel was never alone on their journey through the wilderness.
No matter how confusing it might be, no matter the dangers they might face, the cloud was always there.
God was always with them.
The message on the day of Pentecost is that the Holy Spirit has come to each believer, and we are not alone.
In some of his final words of encouragement,
and instruction to his disciples, Jesus spoke of the Holy Spirit's coming in his ministry, this from John 16, 13.
When the spirit of truth comes, he will guide you into all truth.
Now that promise had special application to the disciples.
We see it unfolding all through the book of Acts, but we also recognize the Holy Spirit gives guidance to all who follow Jesus.
I was talking to a friend recently regarding a worship song they'd heard, a new one that had come out,
And she said there was one lion that bothered her.
And maybe you've heard this song.
It says, this one lion says, we need another Pentecost.
And what struck her was, we don't need another Pentecost.
Pentecost has happened.
The Holy Spirit has come.
We're not still waiting and hoping that God sends His Spirit.
The Spirit has come and He has stayed with God's people.
You don't need a temple or a priest or even a pastor to connect you with God.
His spirit is pleased to dwell in us as Jesus' people.
1 Corinthians 3, 16 says, do you not know that you are God's temple and that God's spirit dwells in you?
You know, Israel didn't have to ask for or earn the fiery cloud.
In fact, as we'll see, they were frequently described as being stiff-necked people.
You want to talk about people who deserved God's favor.
These folks weren't them.
The fiery cloud was not their reward.
It was God's gift to them.
Not even the disciples in that upper room had to ask for the Holy Spirit.
Jesus simply told them to go and pray and wait.
but they really had no idea exactly what they were waiting for.
And those guys were not all paragons of faith either, were they?
I mean, it was Peter who not too many days prior had denied even new Jesus, or Thomas who made himself famous ever since for being the doubter.
But we're told even when Jesus ascended that there were some of them who saw that happen, it says, and some doubted.
So it's not that these guys had it all figured out that they were all so good, so faithful.
The only thing they had done was simply to trust what Jesus said.
He told them to go, to pray, to wait, they did, and God acted.
And so I would just say that if you have placed your faith in Jesus, then God's Spirit is pleased to dwell in you.
It is His gift.
Not because you deserve it, not because you've earned it, not because you prayed hard enough to get it, but because God is pleased to pour His Spirit out on His people.
And because of that, you are never alone.
Second, I would say that our job is not to coax the Spirit to come, but rather to follow the Spirit where He leads.
That was Israel's experience with the fiery cloud.
When it moved, they moved.
Where it moved, they went.
And when it paused, they set up camp.
So how do we experience a spirit-led life?
I don't know about you, but there have certainly been times in my life when I would have welcomed a fiery cloud.
Okay, Lord, what should I do now?
And it would be lovely if I would look out the front door and there would be a fiery pillar stand in front yard that said, right this way, Tim,
Now, wouldn't it be nice if you got up in the morning?
And there it was, just waiting outside the front door.
And all you had to do was follow it out to the car and off you went.
You know, maybe your boss called and said, why haven't you shown up for work?
He'd say, boss, I'm sorry, but the cloud hasn't moved your way yet.
It's not my fault.
Your wife asks, if you're going to get the lawn mode, and you let her know that you'll head to the mower just as soon as the cloud does, that would be kind of handy.
It would probably speed some things up.
It might not always be convenient.
Sunday morning, 20 minutes before church, the cloud is sitting in the car honking the horn.
It's time to go.
You're trying to sleep in.
The cloud keeps lighting up the room, saying it's time to get him to go to work.
You gotta get out of bed.
You need to pray.
It could be both a blessing and an annoyance, but at least it'd be real clear where you were supposed to be every day.
Unfortunately, the cloud was a one-time experience for Israel.
God led and directed them all through the wilderness.
And even after, but after the wilderness, it was in different ways.
It was through prophets, kings, signs.
And I'd say the Spirit is still leading us as well, but it's not a fiery cloud going ahead of a mass migration.
It's a more intimate, personal encounter.
The Apostle Paul described it being a walk.
I like that terminology.
I think because I grew up in
An environment where oftentimes our sense of being in the spirit had to involve a lot of volume, a lot of excitement, a lot of getting the crowd really wound up.
And then when Paul talks about a walk in the spirit, it's that he had a walk.
It's this humble, progressive, day by day, step by step, movement of my heart and my attitudes and my actions.
Here's how he described it in his letter to the church at Galatia, Galatians chapter five.
I say walk by the spirit and you will not gratify the desires of the flesh.
For the desires of the flesh are against the spirit and the desires of the spirit are against the flesh.
For these are opposed to each other to keep you from doing the things you want to do.
But if you are led by the spirit, you are not under the law.
Now the works of the flesh are evident.
Sexual immorality, impurity, sensuality, idolatry, sorcery, enmity, strife, jealousy, fits of anger, rivalries, dissensions, divisions, envy, drunkenness, orgies, and things like these.
I warn you, as I warned you before, that those who do such things will not inherit the kingdom of God.
But the fruit of the Spirit is love.
joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, self-control.
Against such things, there is no law.
And those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires.
If we live by this spirit, I love this phrase, let us also keep in step with the spirit.
Let us not become conceited, provoking one another, and being one another.
Paul says here, you get a pretty good idea as to whether or not you're following the leading the Holy Spirit, if you're staying in step with him by looking at the tracks that you're leaving.
He talks about the works of the flesh.
He says, if you're getting caught up in immoral sexual behavior,
You find your heart being consumed with jealousy and anger.
If you keep getting caught up in petty arguments with people, if you move from one interpersonal falling out to the next, if some of your habits, he talks about drunkenness, if you're drinking is getting to excess or any behavior that indicates that self-interest is winning out over true love, he says you can be sure that you are not being led by the Spirit.
On the other hand, he says, if you find yourself choosing to turn away from anger, seeking the good of others, quieting your heart and seeking to love, even the people who offend you, says that it's a good indicator that in the wilderness of this world, you are being led by God's Spirit.
So how are you doing?
What kind of tracks did you leave behind this week?
So how do we become better followers?
Well, the first thing I would say is we need to pay attention.
The children of Israel knew when to move because the fiery cloud rusted at the center of the accountment.
And the fiery cloud didn't drive them, it led them.
And that meant they had to pay attention.
Where was it leading?
You know, we are distracted people.
So many distractions.
If we want to be led by the Spirit, we need to choose disciplines in life that will put the Lord at the center of our attention.
In fact, here's a fun experiment.
You might think back over just the past week and ask yourself, how much time have you spent meditating on God's word, time spent in prayer?
versus time spent watching news.
Some of you get pretty wound up over the news.
And when I hear how your personal life goes, I was no surprise because you're spending hours upon hours immersing yourself in a medium that is completely designed to keep you wound up.
And if I try to find out, well, how much time have you actually spent in God's Word?
Well, I mean, I read the three-minute daily bread a couple times this week.
Say, well, no wonder you're having a hard time having a heart that's being led by the Spirit because you're a distracted person.
You're paying attention to everything else except the things that matter most.
If we want to be led by the spirit, we need to choose the disciplines that will put the Lord to the center of our attention.
And one of the ways we do that is we choose a regular time to read and study God's word.
Someone 19 says, your word is a lamp to my feet and a light to my path.
Second thing I would say is we need to prioritize the encampment.
What I mean by that is
giving time and attention to the gathering with other believers.
The Holy Spirit has been poured out on each of us as individuals, but he has not done so to enable us to live lives in solitude.
Israel followed the fiery cloud together.
The apostles, as they waited for Pentecost, were told together to wait for the Spirit's outpouring.
The Apostle Paul repeatedly tells churches that the Holy Spirit gives different gifts to different people for the express purpose of ministering to each other.
The sum of the Spirit's gifts and leading individuals is greater than its parts.
Hebrews 10, let us consider how to stir up one another to love and good works, not neglecting to meet together.
as is the habit of some, but encouraging one another and all the more as you see the day drawing near.
Put emphasis on the encampment.
I was listening to a podcast yesterday regarding the church in Iran.
They're talking about the revival that is happening in Iran.
They now think there were over a million believers in Iran.
God is doing some amazing things spiritually there.
They said one of the things the authorities have become focused on, they've almost given up trying to put individual believers in prison because they're just too many, they don't have enough prison space.
And so they're going after church leaders and after the gatherings because what they've recognized is it's Christians who gather together that grow, keep them isolated, they're not nearly as much trouble, but let them come together
And God starts doing powerful things.
Third thing I would say is give time to prayer.
Not demanding prayer, but abiding prayer.
And I'll tell you, this is one that I struggle with.
It is real easy for me when I think about prayer to show up with my grocery list.
Okay, God, here's the stuff I need you to do for me this week.
You know, Moses didn't get up each morning
grab a map and then approach the fiery cloud with his demands as to where they should be led for the day.
And that's how some of us come to prayer.
We treat prayer kind of like the GPS in our car.
And when I get in the car and I punch in where I want to go, and then it's like, you know what, I'll let the GPS decide how best to get me there, but I'll still set the destinations.
That's not how we seek the Spirit's guidance.
The disciples worshiped
and they waited on the Lord for His direction.
And I think that waiting is oftentimes one of the most difficult things that we do in a Christian life.
At least it is for me.
Did you notice that sometimes Israel's fiery cloud stayed put for days or months or even longer?
That's a hard thing when God puts you someplace and you feel like He's telling you, you just need to stay.
You need to wait.
You've probably heard me say this before, but I'll say it again.
The difference between patience and passivity is a fine one.
How do you tell the difference if you are being patient, waiting for God, or if you've just become a passive person that isn't moving?
Why say the difference is, are you paying attention?
See, patient people keep looking and saying, okay, Lord, what do you want me to do next?
Passive people just get comfortable and say, I don't really care.
You know, unless God rocks my boat, I'm not paying attention.
Are you paying attention?
The fourth thing I would say is we need to allow the spirit to surprise us.
Some of you I know are really comfortable with the supernatural side of how God works.
The idea that the spirit might at times lead us in unusual ways is no big deal.
That's actually something you're really excited about.
You look for often.
Some of you I know have had, you've had dreams that have been really shaping.
You've had distinct mental images.
You know came via God's spirit.
You've been helped by a trusted friend who felt that they'd received a word from the Lord for you and it was exactly what you needed.
Others of us are a lot more comfortable with highly rational, tightly knit logic.
We love the Lord, but we believe He guides us much more through good solid Bible study, and we don't really go for that kind of woo-woo stuff.
And I can put myself in that camp.
Now, I grew up in very charismatic circles, but quite honestly, I get uncomfortable when things get too woo-woo.
I have seen the excesses.
I've seen the errors that can happen when people begin to place an inappropriate emphasis on seeking supernatural science.
For those of us who have seen the abuses, it is easily to simply shut ourselves down to anything intangible like that.
But you know, both scripture and in my own experience has taught me that God's spirit cannot be put in a box.
fiery clouds are not easily contained.
Listening to this podcast last night about the revival happening in Iran.
And one of the stories I shared was an Iranian couple who had lost everything.
They'd been forced to become refugees.
They had totally disparate of life.
And they finally had the night.
They said, tonight is our last night.
Tomorrow, we're going to die together.
They were going to take their lives.
That night, unbeknownst to each other,
They both had identical dreams about Jesus.
The husband woke up so shaken by this dream, he went out and found a small home fellowship, a small Christian church he knew about, and gave his heart to Jesus.
He came home, his wife can see that something has happened, they get talking, he says, well, I had this dream.
She begins crying and says, well, I had exactly the same dream.
Hey, say what you will, that's kind of on the woo-woo scale,
But God can do that.
Another couple that heard the gospel via a Christian Persian language website.
And they gave their lives to Jesus.
They became part of a home fellowship.
They were excited.
They were growing.
And then their lease ran out.
And they couldn't afford the new rent.
And they had to move across town to a new apartment place.
There were 10 apartments.
And there was a barbecue held for everybody in the apartment building to get acquainted.
And as they're having dinner,
One of the guys in the table looks across at this man and says, what is it about you that is different from us?
There's something different about you.
And inside this guy just hears God's spirit say, tell him.
Now you understand, they're living in a religiously authoritarian Muslim majority culture.
He's scared, but there's a strong sense.
Tell him.
So he says, well,
we have met Jesus and he has changed our lives.
They go home, they actually lock and bolt the door and put the chain up because they're so terrified the secret police are gonna show up that night.
At about 11 o'clock there's a knock at the door and they think this is it.
We've been turned in, they cracked the door open and there's a neighbor standing there.
Says, can I talk to you about Jesus?
They invite him in by two o'clock the next morning that guy gives his heart to the Lord.
The next afternoon, another neighbor comes to him.
He thinks he's the only one.
He says, could I talk to you about Jesus?
Within a month, at least one member of every household in the apartment complex had come to faith in Jesus.
Now, do you think God had a hand in moving them to a new apartment building?
And promptings say, go ahead, tell them what I've done in your life.
A majority of what Israel did was extremely
normal.
They walked day after day.
They did not teleport.
They did not levitate.
They just walked.
Moses was called on to settle disputes.
In fact, he even had to appoint a whole judicial system to help people work out their civic affairs.
It was pretty normal stuff.
Good rational problem solving.
They weren't using crystal balls.
There were animals to be herded, there were children to be schooled, but there was also the fiery cloud.
And it was anything but normal.
Most of the trip was undertaken the same way every trip was undertaken, but leading them was something more, something that went beyond the natural world.
It was the leading of God's spirit that impacted every step of the trip.
And I say all that to say that part of being people led by the spirit
does mean staying open and sensitive to the spirit's promptings in ways that may be supernatural.
If you have an inner prompting, a dream, receive a word from a friend that they believe God has given them, don't write it off, but check it out.
Paul told a Christian, he said, hey, if someone says they've got a word from the Lord, judge the spirits.
You use some discernment there.
But Paul, a pretty rational guy himself, didn't deny that things like that could happen.
He just said they should be judged carefully.
We saw this when we studied the book of Acts.
There were times that Paul made travel plans, and they got changed by the Holy Spirit.
This from Acts 16, 7.
They attempted to go in Bithynia, but the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them.
Luke doesn't explain exactly how Paul and company got that message, but it was clear to them that they were being divinely rerouted.
So for myself, I have stolen a phrase that I first heard from Preston Sprinkle.
He calls himself a small sea charismatic with the seat belt on.
I think that's me.
Maybe a three-point harness.
Here's what I want to say.
God's spirit is with us and in us.
I believe he is willing and he is able to lead us just like he led the children of Israel.
It probably won't be by fiery cloud, but he will lead us.
He will lead us by his word.
He will lead us through his people.
And as we listen and as we watch carefully, sometimes he may lead us in surprising ways.
But here's the question.
Are we paying attention?
Let's pray.
Father, thank you for the story of Israel, that image of the fiery cloud going before them.
Thank you even more for the image of Acts that your fire, your spirit came to rest on each one of your disciples.
That promise that your spirit has been poured out on us.
Not because we deserve it.
Not because we've somehow weadled it from you.
Because in your grace, you've been pleased to dwell with and in us as your people.
But I pray that we would pay attention.
Help our distracted hearts, Father, I pray.
This world shouts so loudly and wants us to give it our allegiance and our full attention.
Father, free us, I pray, from that kind of slavery.
Give us hearts that hunger to know you, hearts that hunger to follow you, that the fruit of your spirit would be the things that people see in our life.
I pray that we'd be the kind of people, that when we're sitting with neighbors at a dinner, they would look at us and say, what is this different about you?
You don't seem to walk and live the same way that everybody else is living.
What is it?
And Lord, as we have those opportunities, give us hearts that are open and ready to listen to your spirit and willing to speak what we have found in Jesus.
Give us eyes and ears and hearts that are attentive to you.
that are open and willing, whether it means to patiently wait where we are, whether it is to get up and take a bold step of faith, Lord, may we walk in step with Your Spirit, I pray.
And I ask these things in Jesus' name.
Amen.